README.md, before:

# log - ship log system and integrated blog

This collection of scripts implements a system for maintaining, manipulating
and publishing a simple ship's log using data derived from a
[Signal K](http://www.signalk.org) Node Server.
A reference implementation of the __log__ system executes on the vessel
_Beatrice of Hull_ and log files are published daily by email to the ship's
[Wordpress blog](http://www.pdjr.eu/).

The log system core implementation consists of a single bash(1) script
responsible for creating and updating daily log files and a number of other
scripts designed to interrogate these files, render the contained data in a
range of formats and distribute the rendered content via email.
These scripts can, in principle, execute on any machine which has real-time
access to port 80 on the Signal K server(s) supplying the raw log data.
_Beatrice_'s log system simply runs on the ship's Signal K server host with
script execution automated by the system scheduler.

At the end of each day, _Beatrice_ publishes the day's log to an unattended
email account.
The substantive content of the published material is a table of operating data
and a KML attachment which represents the ship's passage over the preceeding 24
hours.
A cloud-based Wordpress blog installation uses the _Postie_ plugin to
retrieve the published email and a simple filter script written in PHP is used
by _Postie_ to interpolate an _Open Sea Map_ rendering of the KML document into
a new blog page.

## Log files and log system configuration

A log file is a plain text file consisting of an arbitrary number of log entries
relating to a single day as defined by the local time zone.
Log files have a name of the form _YYYYMMDD_.

Each entry in a log file is just a time-stamped, labelled, Signal K data value. 
A snippet from one of _Beatrice_'s recent log files looks like this:

```
2019-07-13T22:00:01Z [2019-07-13T22:00:01.293Z] TANKLEVEL FuelPS .3811
2019-07-13T22:00:01Z [2019-07-13T22:00:01.678Z] TANKLEVEL FuelSB .4134
2019-07-13T22:00:01Z [2019-07-13T22:00:01.778Z] BATTERYSTATE Domestic .9223
2019-07-13T22:00:01Z [2019-07-13T22:00:02.318Z] POSITION Position { "latitude": 52.4031, "longitude": 5.6222 }
2019-07-13T22:00:01Z [2019-07-13T22:00:02.062Z] ENGINE State 0
2019-07-13T22:00:01Z [2019-07-13T22:00:02.062Z] GENERATOR State 0
```

Each log entry has the general format.

_timestamp_ __[___signalk-timestamp___]__ _label-1_ _label-1.1_ _value_

Where _timestamp_ is the time the log entry was made; _signalk-timestamp_ is time
Signal K associates with _value_; _label-1_ and _label-1.1_ are identifying
labels for _value_ which is the substantive Signal K data point.

Exactly what data is written to a log file is determined by a log configuration file
which consists of a collection of _enquiries_ organised into named _paragraphs_.
_Beatrice_'s log configuration file looks like this.

```
[INIT]
TANKLEVEL Wastewater http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/wasteWater/0/currentLevel
TANKLEVEL FreshwaterPS http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/freshWater/1/currentLevel
TANKLEVEL FreshwaterSB http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/freshWater/2/currentLevel
TANKLEVEL FuelPS http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/fuel/3/currentLevel
TANKLEVEL FuelSB http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/fuel/4/currentLevel
BATTERYSTATE Domestic http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/electrical/batteries/258/capacity/stateOfCharge
POSITION Position http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/navigation/position

[REALTIME]
ENGINE State http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/electrical/switches/16/16/state
>POSITION Position http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/navigation/position
GENERATOR State http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/electrical/switches/16/14/state

[ONCLOSE]
TANKLEVEL Wastewater http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/wasteWater/0/currentLevel
TANKLEVEL FreshwaterPS http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/freshWater/1/currentLevel
TANKLEVEL FreshwaterSB http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/freshWater/2/currentLevel
TANKLEVEL FuelPS http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/fuel/3/currentLevel
TANKLEVEL FuelSB http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/fuel/4/currentLevel
BATTERYSTATE Domestic http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/electrical/batteries/258/capacity/stateOfCharge
```

Each enquiry in the log configuration file has the general format:

\[__>__|__!__\]_label-1_ _label-1.1_ _url_

where _label-1_ and _label-1.1_ serve both a documentary and identification
role and _url_ gives the path to the Signal K data value that should be stored
in the log.

The '>' character at the beginning of an enquiry identifies it as conditional
and it will only be processed if processing of the immediately preceeding
non-conditional enquiry obtained a value of 1 from the Signal K server.
Thus, in the configuration presented above, if executing the "ENGINE State"
enquiry returns the value "1" (saying engine running), then the ">POSITION
Position" enquiry will be processed, otherwise it will be ignored, ensuring that
position data is only logged if the vessel is moving.

The '!' character at the beginning of an enquiry identifies it as non-recording
meaning that it will be processed normally but the result will not be saved to
the log.
This behaviour can be used in combination with subsequent conditional enquiries
to perform and invisible test. 

## Log system scripts

All log system scripts take a __-h__ option which displays the script's
comprehensive manual page: the following descriptions do not address all
available options.  

## Using `log-update` to maintain the log

The `log-update` script is exclusively responsible for updating daily log files
by executing the Signal K enquiries identified in the log configuration file and
will automatically create new log files conditioned by time in the current time
zone.
When a new log file is created, enquiries in any "INIT" paragraph are
automatically executed.

In normal use, `log-update` takes one or more paragraph names as its
argument(s) and processes the selected enquiries into log entries.
It usually makes sense to schedule execution of the update script: indeed, if
the log system is being used to track vessel movements, then scheduling is
pretty-much mandatory and the frequency of script execution will determine
the resolution of the logged track.

The `log-update` script will only write values returned from the Signal K server
to the log file if they differ from the most recent previously logged value.

On _Beatrice_ `log-update` is executed in response to the following `crontab`
entries:

```
*/1 * * * * root /usr/local/bin/log-update run  >/dev/null 2>/dev/null
59 23 * * * root /usr/local/bin/log-update -f onclose  >/dev/null 2>/dev/null
```

## Extracting and processing log file data

All of the log file extraction and processing scripts take a _file-selector_
argument which is a full or partial log file name of the form _YYYYMMDD_,
_YYYYMM_ or _YYYY_, selecting a daily log file, all log files for a month or all
log files for a year respectively.

### log-positions - get the positions through which the vessel passed

Returns a list of position values from the selected log file(s).
The generated output is a list of JSON records with latitude, longitude and date
fields.

### log-stops - get the start, stop and halt positions

Returns a list of stop and (optionally) halt positions from the selected log
file(s).
The generated output is a list in the same format as that produced by
`log-positions`.

### log-trip - get the distance travelled

Uses the Haversine formula to compute the distance between the positions
returned by `log-positions` and returns the sum of the computed values.

### log-runtime - get the total runtime of some device

Returns the total runtime _HH_:_MM_ for some device by filtering the selected
log files using a supplied token and then summing the intervals between State 1
and State 0 log entries. 

### log-tabulate - returns an HTML table depicting the start and finish values
for some metrics

### log-kml - returns a KML document representing position and stop data

### log-email - emails the output of `log-tabulate` and `log-kml` to one or more recipients

## Wordpress configuration

The Wordpress installation which supports publishing of _Beatrice_'s blog relies
on the
[Postie](https://wordpress.org/plugins/postie/)
plugin and, for rendering of vessel postion on a map, the
[OSM](https://wordpress.org/plugins/osm/)
plugin.  

Wordpress must be configured to allow all types of file upload by setting
`define('ALLOW_UNFILTERED_UPLOADS', true);` in the installation's
`wp-config.php` file.
Additionally, a user with administrator priveleges must be identified as the
Postie user.

Postie must be configured to process messages in the email the account to which
the log system publishes and to post the received email as the identified
Wordpress user.
The Postie option which requires user login must be set to 'yes' and that which
defines the format of received email set to 'text'.

At this stage, log system messages will appear as blog posts which display
operational data and include a link to the KML attachment describing vessel
movement.

To render the KML attachment as a map, __postie-kml-plugin.php__ must be copied
into the `wp-content/mu-plugins/` folder.
OSM requires no special configuration.

The __postie-kml-plugin.php__ script works by replacing the KML attachment link
in an email generated blog post with a Wordpress short-code which triggers the
OSM plugin.

Commit message:

Generalised log-tabulate into log-report

README.md, after:

# log - ship log system and integrated blog

This collection of scripts implements a system for maintaining, manipulating
and publishing a simple ship's log using data derived from a
[Signal K](http://www.signalk.org) Node Server.
A reference implementation of the __log__ system executes on the vessel
_Beatrice of Hull_ and log files are published daily by email to the ship's
[Wordpress blog](http://www.pdjr.eu/).

The log system core implementation consists of a single bash(1) script
responsible for creating and updating daily log files and a number of other
scripts designed to interrogate these files, render the contained data in a
range of formats and distribute the rendered content via email.
These scripts can, in principle, execute on any machine which has real-time
access to port 80 on the Signal K server(s) supplying the raw log data.
_Beatrice_'s log system simply runs on the ship's Signal K server host with
script execution automated by the system scheduler.

At the end of each day, _Beatrice_ publishes the day's log to an unattended
email account.
The substantive content of the published material is a table of operating data
and a KML attachment which represents the ship's passage over the preceeding 24
hours.
A cloud-based Wordpress blog installation uses the _Postie_ plugin to
retrieve the published email and a simple filter script written in PHP is used
by _Postie_ to interpolate an _Open Sea Map_ rendering of the KML document into
a new blog page.

## Log files and log system configuration

A log file is a plain text file consisting of an arbitrary number of log entries
relating to a single day as defined by the local time zone.
Log files have a name of the form _YYYYMMDD_.

Each entry in a log file is just a time-stamped, labelled, Signal K data value. 
A snippet from one of _Beatrice_'s recent log files looks like this:

```
2019-07-13T22:00:01Z [2019-07-13T22:00:01.293Z] TANKLEVEL FuelPS .3811
2019-07-13T22:00:01Z [2019-07-13T22:00:01.678Z] TANKLEVEL FuelSB .4134
2019-07-13T22:00:01Z [2019-07-13T22:00:01.778Z] BATTERYSTATE Domestic .9223
2019-07-13T22:00:01Z [2019-07-13T22:00:02.318Z] POSITION Position { "latitude": 52.4031, "longitude": 5.6222 }
2019-07-13T22:00:01Z [2019-07-13T22:00:02.062Z] ENGINE State 0
2019-07-13T22:00:01Z [2019-07-13T22:00:02.062Z] GENERATOR State 0
```

Each log entry has the general format.

_timestamp_ __[___signalk-timestamp___]__ _label-1_ _label-1.1_ _value_

Where _timestamp_ is the time the log entry was made; _signalk-timestamp_ is time
Signal K associates with _value_; _label-1_ and _label-1.1_ are identifying
labels for _value_ which is the substantive Signal K data point.

Exactly what data is written to a log file is determined by a log configuration file
which consists of a collection of _enquiries_ organised into named _paragraphs_.
_Beatrice_'s log configuration file looks like this.

```
[INIT]
TANKLEVEL Wastewater http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/wasteWater/0/currentLevel
TANKLEVEL FreshwaterPS http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/freshWater/1/currentLevel
TANKLEVEL FreshwaterSB http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/freshWater/2/currentLevel
TANKLEVEL FuelPS http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/fuel/3/currentLevel
TANKLEVEL FuelSB http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/fuel/4/currentLevel
BATTERYSTATE Domestic http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/electrical/batteries/258/capacity/stateOfCharge
POSITION Position http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/navigation/position

[REALTIME]
ENGINE State http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/electrical/switches/16/16/state
>POSITION Position http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/navigation/position
GENERATOR State http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/electrical/switches/16/14/state

[ONCLOSE]
TANKLEVEL Wastewater http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/wasteWater/0/currentLevel
TANKLEVEL FreshwaterPS http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/freshWater/1/currentLevel
TANKLEVEL FreshwaterSB http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/freshWater/2/currentLevel
TANKLEVEL FuelPS http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/fuel/3/currentLevel
TANKLEVEL FuelSB http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/tanks/fuel/4/currentLevel
BATTERYSTATE Domestic http://192.168.1.1:3000/signalk/v1/api/vessels/self/electrical/batteries/258/capacity/stateOfCharge
```

Each enquiry in the log configuration file has the general format:

\[__>__|__!__\]_label-1_ _label-1.1_ _url_

where _label-1_ and _label-1.1_ serve both a documentary and identification
role and _url_ gives the path to the Signal K data value that should be stored
in the log.

The '>' character at the beginning of an enquiry identifies it as conditional
and it will only be processed if processing of the immediately preceeding
non-conditional enquiry obtained a value of 1 from the Signal K server.
Thus, in the configuration presented above, if executing the "ENGINE State"
enquiry returns the value "1" (saying engine running), then the ">POSITION
Position" enquiry will be processed, otherwise it will be ignored, ensuring that
position data is only logged if the vessel is moving.

The '!' character at the beginning of an enquiry identifies it as non-recording
meaning that it will be processed normally but the result will not be saved to
the log.
This behaviour can be used in combination with subsequent conditional enquiries
to perform and invisible test. 

## Log system scripts

All log system scripts take a __-h__ option which displays the script's
comprehensive manual page: the following descriptions do not address all
available options.  

## Using `log-update` to maintain the log

The `log-update` script is exclusively responsible for updating daily log files
by executing the Signal K enquiries identified in the log configuration file and
will automatically create new log files conditioned by time in the current time
zone.
When a new log file is created, enquiries in any "INIT" paragraph are
automatically executed.

In normal use, `log-update` takes one or more paragraph names as its
argument(s) and processes the selected enquiries into log entries.
It usually makes sense to schedule execution of the update script: indeed, if
the log system is being used to track vessel movements, then scheduling is
pretty-much mandatory and the frequency of script execution will determine
the resolution of the logged track.

The `log-update` script will only write values returned from the Signal K server
to the log file if they differ from the most recent previously logged value.

On _Beatrice_ `log-update` is executed in response to the following `crontab`
entries:

```
*/1 * * * * root /usr/local/bin/log-update run  >/dev/null 2>/dev/null
59 23 * * * root /usr/local/bin/log-update -f onclose  >/dev/null 2>/dev/null
```

## Extracting and processing log file data

All of the log file extraction and processing scripts take a _file-selector_
argument which is a full or partial log file name of the form _YYYYMMDD_,
_YYYYMM_ or _YYYY_, selecting a daily log file, all log files for a month or all
log files for a year respectively.

### log-get - return values from the log selecting records using a regular expression

Returns a list of values from the selected log file(s) after filtering
records using a regular expression.

### log-positions - get the positions through which the vessel passed

Returns a list of position values from the selected log file(s).
The generated output is a list of JSON records with latitude, longitude and date
fields.

### log-stops - get the start, stop and halt positions

Returns a list of stop and (optionally) halt positions from the selected log
file(s).
The generated output is a list in the same format as that produced by
`log-positions`.

### log-trip - get the distance travelled

Uses the Haversine formula to compute the distance between the positions
returned by `log-positions` and returns the sum of the computed values.

### log-runtime - get the total runtime of some device

Returns the total runtime _HH_:_MM_ for some device by filtering the selected
log files using a supplied token and then summing the intervals between State 1
and State 0 log entries. 

### log-report - populate a report template with log data values

### log-kml - returns a KML document representing position and stop data

### log-email - emails the output of `log-tabulate` and `log-kml` to one or more recipients

## Wordpress configuration

The Wordpress installation which supports publishing of _Beatrice_'s blog relies
on the
[Postie](https://wordpress.org/plugins/postie/)
plugin and, for rendering of vessel postion on a map, the
[OSM](https://wordpress.org/plugins/osm/)
plugin.  

Wordpress must be configured to allow all types of file upload by setting
`define('ALLOW_UNFILTERED_UPLOADS', true);` in the installation's
`wp-config.php` file.
Additionally, a user with administrator priveleges must be identified as the
Postie user.

Postie must be configured to process messages in the email the account to which
the log system publishes and to post the received email as the identified
Wordpress user.
The Postie option which requires user login must be set to 'yes' and that which
defines the format of received email set to 'text'.

At this stage, log system messages will appear as blog posts which display
operational data and include a link to the KML attachment describing vessel
movement.

To render the KML attachment as a map, __postie-kml-plugin.php__ must be copied
into the `wp-content/mu-plugins/` folder.
OSM requires no special configuration.

The __postie-kml-plugin.php__ script works by replacing the KML attachment link
in an email generated blog post with a Wordpress short-code which triggers the
OSM plugin.
